---
layout: post
title:  "How to get off the internet addiction roller coaster"
date:   2024-03-06 00:00:00 +0800
categories: self-improvement 
---

As I mentioned in my last post on attention, addictions to internet based activities like social media, video gaming, video streaming, porn and online shopping are particularly insidious and difficult to shake. In fact, I myself, after going maybe the longest I had ever gone without using YouTube (my internet addiction of choice) found myself slipping back into more compulsive use of the platform after only one week of unbridled consumption, courtesy of my having caught COVID-19 and not having the energy to do much else. People are starting to take addiction to these platforms more seriously nowadays, but they’re a long way from being treated like drug or alcohol addiction, I think largely because they’re seen as comparatively innocuous. Whilst a heroin addiction will manifest physically, with symptoms in the body arising in response to the lack of the addiction material, Internet addiction manifests mentally as a vague discomfort and an urge to satisfy that discomfort by succumbing to it and opening up the browser or application of choice. Internet addiction won’t kill you, but it can suck the joy out of your life and keep you stuck well below the level of your true potential. If nothing else, it’s very hard to get anything of consequence done if you’re dedicating 4 or more hours a day to meaningless doom scrolling. So, in the hopes that it will help someone else out there, I’m sharing my own battle with internet addiction, the blueprint for how I managed to get it under control for a few months, and how I hope to maintain a healthy relationship with these platforms going forward.

### Why you’re addicted

If you’re anything like me, you’re probably getting a bit frustrated with your lack of self control, asking yourself why you can’t just focus on what you need to do. Let’s just start by recognising a few things about these internet companies. First of all, virtually all of these internet companies make their money in proportion to the amount of time their users spend on their websites. Secondly, these companies have spent significant amounts of time and money on teams of psychologists and software engineers, who designed their services to exploit as many mental tricks as possible to compel their users to want to use their services as much as possible. So, when you’re feeling that mental resistance when trying to abstain from social media, just realise that this is not a sign of mental weakness – you’re simply fighting an unfair fight against teams of psychologists who are funded by profit hungry mega corporations – don’t be too hard on yourself.

### Why you use your internet platform of choice

At first glance, you might be tempted to think “didn’t we just answer this question? I use Instagram because I’m addicted!”. I encourage you to think a little bit more deeply about this question though. What was your initial motivation for creating an Instagram account for example. Maybe you wanted to keep up with your friends’ lives even while you’re living abroad, or perhaps you wanted to share your travel pics with friends and family that you don’t get to see often. In the case of YouTube, perhaps you have some hobbies that you’re really into, and watching videos about your hobby inspires you to try new things and further explore that hobby. You see, all of these platforms have a legitimate and – you might even dare to say – healthy use case at their core – it’s just that they have all these other features that are unrelated to this core use case (like Instagram Reels or YouTube Shorts) that exist only to suck you into a cycle of doom scrolling. It’s worth making note of your personal reasons for using these platforms and thinking about whether it’s possible to separate out those features from the addictive and unproductive features. For example, I used my phone’s built in screen time functionality to limit my daily usage of Instagram for 15 minutes, which is just enough time to watch all of my friends’ stories and reply to messages and reels that I’ve been sent, without having time to open up reels myself and start doom scrolling. 

### Take a 30 day break

This is an idea I picked up from a book called “Digital Minimalism” by Cal Newport. In the book, he suggests a digital detox, where you severely limit your “optional” online or digital activities for 30 days. Basically, if the technology isn’t strictly required for your work, it gets cut completely for that 30 days. He doesn’t suggest you just jump right into this detox though – it’s important that you put some pre-emptive thought into how you will spend all this extra time you will now find yourself with in the upcoming 30 days. Think about some things that you’ve been wanting to explore that you hadn’t had time to work on before. Maybe you’ve been toying with the idea of learning to paint, or maybe you want to dust off the guitar in the corner of the room and get back into playing regularly. Having a pre-prepared list of things that you can do will help you stave off that empty, gnawing sensation of wanting to open up your Instagram in moments of boredom, and will also give your brain a reminder of what delayed gratification feels like.

### Realise the cost of your addiction

Think about how you feel after spending 3 hours straight doom scrolling on Instagram, or whatever platform you find most compelling. Do you feel like it was a worthwhile expenditure of time? Do you feel fulfilled, happy? If you’re anything like me, probably not. For me, bingeing on social media gives me feelings of regret, depression and lethargy. So, not only does it take away precious hours of my life, but in exchange for that time I get feelings of regret, depression and other terrible things like that. Internet addiction in it’s various forms is underestimated by society at large – Instagram, YouTube, Netflix etc. are often treated as a relatively harmless way to spend a few idle hours, but if that was how they were actually used, I wouldn’t have any need to write this post. The reality for many of us is that when our attention isn’t captured by something necessary for our survival, it’s spent on one of more of these internet platforms. Put in simpler terms, when we’re not working or sleeping, we’re occupied with mindless entertainment – leaving little or no time for the many things that give our lives meaning, like pursuing hobbies, building relationships, chasing after big goals and experiencing the simple pleasures of life. You need to reframe your attitude towards these platforms – rather than a harmless bit of fun, they are soul-sucking vampires that will rob you of the opportunity to lead a meaningful life.

### Notice how ‘the urge’ feels

During the course of your 30 day break, you’ll find yourself wanting to open up your platform of choice numerous times. When that feeling arises, pay attention to how you’re feeling, what does that urge feel like? It might be a hollow, gnawing sensation in your solar plexus, a vague feeling of unease or anxiety or even just plain boredom. Don’t worry if you can’t quite pinpoint the sensation immediately, you’ll have plenty of opportunities to experience it during this period – each time it happens just try to clarify the feeling a little bit more. What you’re experiencing in those moments is withdrawal from internet addiction. In the same way that a heroin addict breaks out in cold sweats, throws up and convulses when they go for a while without a fix, internet addicts feel this slight mental discomfort – ‘the urge’ – when they haven’t opened up their apps of choice in a while. When this urge arises, notice the feeling, realise that it is a temporary withdrawal symptom that it will diminish every day that you’re able to resist it, and engage in one of those more meaningful activities you picked out in the ‘Take a 30 day break’ section of the post. 

### Reset your relationship with these platforms

As we acknowledged in the ‘Why you use your internet platform of choice’ section, there are many legitimate reasons to use these platforms. The 30 day break gives you the opportunity to take a look at your relationship with these platforms from a more objective point of view. Having spent 30 days abstaining from your platforms of choice, you might realise that your quality of life had improved significantly without those things in your life, or you might have found yourself repeatedly running into some legitimate frustrations about not being able to use the platforms for purposes that actually add value to your life. Take stock of these things, decide which platforms serve you, and which ones don’t. Throw out the platforms that don’t serve you at all, and for the ones that do, try to distill what exactly those platforms are providing for you, and go through the following two step process. First, determine if that platform is the best way to serve that purpose. For example, you might have quit Instagram for 30 days, but you found that you felt like you lost touch with close friends and missed out on some quality interactions. Are there any better ways that are feasible for you to get that experience? Could you commit to a video chat or a text message with each of your close friends on a semi-regular basis to catch up with them instead? Secondly, implement the alternative method, or continue to use the platform (if it genuinely is the best way to get that experience) but customise your experience to reduce the likelihood that you’ll get sucked into compulsive behaviour and doom scrolling. For example, if you, like me, found that quitting Instagram made you feel like you were missing out on your friends lives, and weren’t able to share what you were up to as much, then you could try implementing the changes I did. I unfollowed any Instagram page who wasn’t a friend or someone i really cared about keeping in touch with, and set a time limit on the application on my phone of 15 minutes. I found that by doing this, I was able to see what my friends were up to, and share what was going on with me within those 15 minutes, but didn’t have enough time left over to get into watching any reels or doing any of the things that sucked up all my time on the platform.

Changing your relationship with these addictive internet platforms is no easy feat, but you owe it to yourself to take back control of your life, and to experience the many things that life has to offer. Be strong, try your best, and don’t be discouraged by setbacks. As long as you keep trying, you’ll end up in a better place than if you hadn’t tried at all.

– Ed

