---
layout: post
title:  "Why you feel like you don't have any control over your life"
date:   2024-02-18 00:00:00 +0800
categories: self-improvement 
---
Do you ever have the feeling that life is just something that happens to you? If so, you’re not alone. I remember being in my early twenties, having just recently landed my first full time job as an IT consultant and thinking to myself “how did I end up here?”. As a child, I had dreams and ambitions, just like everyone else. At various stages in my life I wanted to be anything from professional baseball player, psychologist, professional trombonist to astronaut, but here I was, consulting for a healthcare software company, barely able to conjure a coherent explanation of what I actually did. It wasn’t a bad job by any means, but it was most certainly not something that I had ever set out to do.

“So what?” you might think. “You had a cushy desk job and a comfortable air-conditioned office to sit in all day. Many people have it so much worse and would happily trade places with you”. And you’re right, it wasn’t that bad – which is probably why so many people who are in that kind of situation don’t feel the need to do anything about it. But think for a moment about the founders of that company I worked for. Those people who, at some point in their lives made a conscious decision to create this company that (as of the time of writing) is worth 28 billion dollars. Here I was, another worker ant in the colony sacrificing my own time and energy to build their company simply because I never made a conscious decision about how I would live my life. The simple fact is, if you don’t direct your own life, other people will happily direct your life for you to meet their own ends. My only agenda with this post is to wake up those of us who are sleepwalking through life, help them take stock of where they currently are and allow them to make a conscious decision to start moving in a direction that they themselves have chosen. Here’s how you do that.

### Decide where you’re going (goal setting)

Any conscious action begins with a decision. You cannot obtain an outcome of your choosing if you never choose an outcome to aim for, so the very first step in living a self-directed life is goal setting. When I was an undergraduate at university, for the first time in my life I encountered people who had definite plans for their life; people who seemed to know exactly what kind of career they wanted and what kind of life they would live. I thought those people were delusional. How could you dedicate all that time and effort to reaching a goal that, once attained, you might realise you absolutely hate? Perhaps you have some similar aversion when you hear the phrase “goal setting” too, which would explain why you are reading this post. 

You see, you need to change your idea of what a goal actually is. You and my past self both thought of goals as objects or outcomes to eventually be achieved in the future. A goal is not an outcome, it is your north star, the compass of your life and it is ever changing. It is only by deciding on a goal that you can begin to move in a direction of your choosing. Those “delusional” people who had definite goals for their life, simply by having a goal and executing on it, were moving in a direction of their own choosing, whereas I was simply drifting down the river of life, letting it take me where it will. Furthermore, goal-setting is a game of trial and error – people at a particular point in time make a decision on where they want to take their life based on the information currently available to them, and then update their goals accordingly as their life changes and new information (e.g. “I actually hate practising medicine”) becomes available to them. So, decide right now, based on the information currently available to you, where you want your life to go.

### Have the courage to try and fail consistently

In school, I was that guy who didn’t study particularly hard, yet still managed to pull off decent grades. This attitude persisted throughout all of my schooling, all the way into university, where that identity was only sufficient to provide grades that could no longer be called “decent”. It was an identity that made me feel somewhat special, like I had some inherent talent that other people lacked. I’ve now met and heard of enough people who had the exact same identity throughout school to know that I wasn’t special, I was just afraid. I was afraid that if I tried, I wouldn’t do as well as the other kids who studied hard and put effort into their schoolwork, and I would no longer be the kid who doesn’t have to try hard to do decently at school. You see, trying requires courage. When you earnestly put effort into something, reality will give a no holds barred honest assessment of where you are at. If you don’t try your hardest, when you receive that feedback from life, you always have that excuse – “well, if i tried harder i’m sure i would have done better” – as a safety blanket. If you don’t try, you’ll never know how good you really are, and you’ll never know how good you could have been. 

So once you know where you want to go, you need to muster the courage to try and take the first few steps in that direction. You need to realise that failure is not a final state that expresses your fundamental inadequacies, it is simply a feedback mechanism. When you try something for the first time, the chances are high that you will suck at that thing. It is important that when you try and reality tells you that you suck, that you don’t take it personally, but rather as just a brutally honest assessment of your current level. Brutally honest assessments of your performance will tell you exactly where you are, and what you need to change or improve in order to reach your true potential. If you never face these harsh truths, you won’t improve – you’ll remain blissfully ignorant of your own inadequacies and thus be unable to address them. This path that you’re now embarking on is an endless cycle of trying, failing, correcting course and trying again. It might sound terrible, but you will begin to improve, you’ll grow thicker skin, and you’ll finally be able to honestly say that you’re living a life that you have chosen for yourself, and that is an incredibly empowering feeling.

### Adopting ownership of your own life

Accountability has become a bit of a dirty word in modern parlance. We most often hear of accountability in the context of a disgraced sports star who has done something to upset the public, and is going to accept “accountability” for their actions. This type of thing has led us to believe that accountability is a synonym for punishment. But accountability is not punishment, it is the final piece of the puzzle to living a self directed life. It is in some ways the very essence of being in control of your own life.

If you want to be in control of your life, you must take ownership of your life. You are responsible for wherever you are in life. I’m not saying this to belittle the many hardships that you may have faced, I’m sure many of you have experienced things that feel so far out of your control that you feel angry just reading those words. The fact is, no matter what happens to you, if you think hard enough, you’ll be able to track down a decision that you made that eventually led you to being in that situation. I ended up in that job that I didn’t really care about because I never had the courage to try and commit to a career of my own choosing. You might think this is an extreme mindset, but think about what we’re trying to achieve here – if you aren’t responsible for where you currently are in life, how could you possibly be responsible for where you end up in the future? How could you be in control of your life? Adopting this mindset gives you an internal locus of control – you are responsible for what happens to you, but by that same token, you are in control of your life. The alternative is an external locus of control, which means that you have no control over what happens to you, and you inherently become a victim of life. You won’t be able to live a self directed life if you aren’t responsible for what happens to you, so adopt an internal locus of control and experience the true freedom that it provides.

I’ll leave you with a little TL;DR

1. Decide where you’re going
2. Try as hard as you can to get there (correct course based on feedback)
3. Adopt complete ownership for the state of your life


– Ed

