---
layout: post
title:  "Your difficulties are challenges designed to make you into who you are supposed to be"
date:   2024-03-15 00:00:00 +0800
categories: self-improvement 
---

Think about some of the difficulties you’re currently facing in life. Maybe you’re struggling to find a job in a tight job market, or you have a loved one who is going through a medical emergency and you have to take care of them. It’s tempting to think that these difficulties are unfair or annoying distractions from the things you really want or need to be doing in your life, but what if they were exactly what you needed? What if the difficulties you are faced with weren’t just random, meaningless events that exist only to make you feel bad, but instead were challenges designed specifically for you at this moment in time – challenges that, if faced, will make you the person you were supposed to be? 

Difficulties are universal, no matter who we are or what kind of life we’re living, we’re all faced with difficult circumstances at every stage of our life. They’re not something we can choose to not have in our life, and frankly, our lives would be quite boring without them. Having said that, we do have some choices when it comes to our difficulties, namely: the meaning that we assign to them, and whether or not we face them. My hypothesis is that if you assign a significant enough meaning to your difficulties, the decision to face them naturally follows.

Imagine that there are two identical versions of you who have been asked to sit in a room, with no phone, no one to talk to and nothing to do for 6 hours. The conditions for both versions of you are identical in all aspects except for the reason, or purpose of your being in that room. One version of you has been put in that room for 6 hours as a punishment – that version of you has done something bad, and this is their punishment. For this version of you, the 6 hours in that room might feel torturous, you might count every second that passes in anticipation of the experience ending. The other version of you was asked to spend that 6 hours in the room by a mentor, who has told that version of you that spending this time away from stimulation of all kinds and meditating is necessary for your spiritual growth. For this version of you, the 6 hours might still be painful in many regards, but you’ll likely have greater perseverance and determination to get through the experience, and you might come out of the experience feeling like it was a valuable and worthwhile thing to have done. 

Both versions of you objectively experienced the same thing, but it clearly felt very different for each version – why is that? The answer lies in meaning. One version of you experienced the event as a punishment – an experience that you’re not meant to enjoy, something that you have to endure to repent for your past transgressions. As such, that version of you found it difficult to endure the experience, and gained very little from it other than perhaps a desire to avoid the experience in the future by not repeating their transgression. The other version of you experienced the event as a challenge – something designed to test your limits and teach you something. Whilst that version of your also found the experience difficult, they were able to see some value in what they experienced, and even a little enjoyment. Ultimately that version of you thought the experience was worthwhile because they were told by a trusted mentor that it would help them grow, which primed them to look for value in the experience. 

In reality, unlike my contrived example above, when we’re faced with difficult situations, we don’t always have an external explanation for why they’re happening to us, and thus we often default to thinking that there’s no deeper meaning or reason for the difficulty – that it’s happening only to spite you. But this attitude, much like the version of you who was “punished” in my above example, makes your difficulties appear as if they are simply hardships that have to be endured, that there is no greater reason for their occurrence, and thus that there is nothing to be gained from facing them. So what’s the solution then? Choosing to believe that the difficulties you’re faced with are there for a reason, challenges created specifically for you at this point of time that will test your limits and help you grow into the person you were supposed to be.

The meaning that you give to your difficulties is a choice – broadly speaking, there are three categories you can put your difficulties in:

1. No meaning, that difficulties are random events that cause you difficulties for no particular reason
2. Negative meaning, that life is conspiring against you and putting these difficulties in your life just to make your life more difficult
3. Positive meaning, that life is putting the exact difficulties that you need in this current moment as a challenge to you, and if you face and complete these challenges you will grow and your life will be better

You might be tempted to think “what right do I have to assume that there is some higher power who wants me to grow and is designing challenges just for me?”. Disregarding the part about the higher power (you can assign the challenge generating entity any identity you wish), it often doesn’t require a leap of faith to see that facing our difficulties will help us grow. I’m sure if you were to think of a challenge you’re currently facing, you would be able to identify a handful of ways in which you might grow, or in which your life might improve having completed the challenge. All we’re imposing on the situation is a reason for why our challenges exist, which is a metaphysical concept more than anything. There may not ever be a way of knowing exactly why challenges exist, and in spite of that, many of us still choose to believe that our difficulties have no meaning or negative meaning – which is also a choice (albeit not a particularly conscious one). So, my challenge to you is, the next time that you’re faced with difficulties, ask yourself the following question: “What if this difficulty is actually a challenge designed specifically for me at this stage in my life?” and face the difficulty as if it were. 

– Ed

